A predictive model for the post-pandemic delay in elective treatment

Authors: Romy Nehme, Alena Puchkova, Ajith Parlikad

1.Abstract:

The COVID-19 pandemic had a major impact on healthcare systems across the world. In the United
Kingdom, one of the strategies used by hospitals to cope with the surge in patients infected with
SARS-Cov-2 was to cancel a vast number of elective treatments planned and limit its resources for
non-critical patients. This resulted in a 30% drop in the number of people joining the waiting list
in 2020–2021 versus 2019–2020.Once the pandemic subsides and resources are freed for elective treatment, the expectation is that the patients failing to receive treatment throughout the pandemic
would trigger a significant backlog on the waiting list post-pandemic with major repercussions to
patient health and quality of life. As the nation emerges from the worst phase of the pandemic,
hospitals are focusing on strategies to prioritise patients for elective treatments. A key challenge in this
context is the ability to quantify the expected backlog and predict the delays experienced by patients
as an outcome of the prioritisation policies. This study presents an approach based on discrete-event
simulation to predict the elective waiting list backlog along with the delay in treatment based on a
predetermined prioritisation policy. The model is demonstrated using data on the endoscopy waiting
list at Cambridge University Hospitals. The model shows that 21% of the patients on the waiting list
will experience a delay less than 18-weeks, the acceptable threshold set by the National Health Service
(NHS). A longer-term scenario analysis based on the model reveals investment in NHS resources will
have a significant positive outcome for addressing the waiting lists. The model presented in this paper
has the potential to be an invaluable tool for post-pandemic planning for hospitals around the world
that are facing a crisis of treatment backlog.

2.Introduction:

The Coronavirus SARS-Cov-2 (COVID-19) pandemic resulted in
an unprecedented global health, economic, and social crisis and
has exposed the vulnerabilities of healthcare systems around the
world due to the scarcity of hospital resources. Many healthcare systems, including the NHS in the UK, diverted elective
treatment resources towards the frontline as a main mitigation
strategy throughout the pandemic. Consequently, a significant
number of elective patients accumulated on the waiting list.
For instance, in February 2021, 4,698,348 waiting list patients
were recorded across England, 35.5% of which incurred a delay
exceeding 18-weeks [1], the acceptable threshold set by the NHS.
The implications of prolonged waiting time include increased
mortality rates for patients, especially non-prioritised patients
[2–4]. A recent study [5] examining historical data across England found that an average two month delay per cancer patient
(considering a three-month lockdown) would result in 2.25% additional lives lost with a backlog on referrals of 25%. Similar studies on chronic cardiac disease [6] indicated significantly higher
mortality rates among patients pending structural procedures.
Given these implications, the main factors hindering elective treatment as COVID-19 stabilises are: shortages in staff
due to sickness or enforced quarantine; inefficiencies in the
supply-chain of surgical material (e.g. consumables, equipment);
restricted availability of suitable operating theatres; rise in expenses for patients and insurance companies due to elaborate
treatment protocols; and triaging non-emergency cases according
to the risk–benefit ratio for the patient and community [7].
In fact, Brown et al. [8] highlight the limitations within elective treatment services, particularly endoscopy, well before the
pandemic exposed the healthcare system’s vulnerabilities. The
authors cite ‘issues with data availability, quality and use’ as a
recurring challenge. Particularly, the endoscopy datasets should
be more comprehensive to present an indication of the reason the
patient was referred for treatment. The authors also consider the
process of accessing and processing these datasets complex due
to inconsistent publishing schedules and formats across different
datasets. Aside from how the data is presented and its timeliness, Greenhalgh et al. [9] and Guerriere [10] argue that a key
issue is the absence of sufficient skills to analyse the available
performance data and translate it into operational improvements.
This study pursues the lack of data or visibility on the waiting list backlog to incite operational improvements across the
recovery of elective waiting lists post-pandemic. Particularly,
tracking the backlog would inform policy planning (e.g. challenge
thresholds for acceptable waiting time), short- and long-term
investments in expanding hospital resource capacities, shortterm hospital resource allocation, as well as offer estimates on the
expected delay in treatment for waiting list patients. To address
these issues, a predictive model for the delay in post-pandemic
elective treatment is introduced based on a pre-determined
scheduling policy. The proposed model-based on discrete-event
simulation — estimates the short- and long-term trajectory of
the elective waiting list to gauge the time period and resources
required for recovery. The model is applied to the endoscopy
department of Cambridge University Hospitals (CUH) as a case
study to demonstrate its practical capability.
The main research aims of the paper include: (i) presenting
a flexible granular simulation model that can be adapted to
different waiting list use cases and optimisation objectives; (ii)
offering short- and long-term delay time and waiting list statistics that can be filtered down to different patient characteristics
(e.g. priority class, elective procedure); (iii) informing waiting list
policy planning and resource allocation through highlighting pain
points (e.g. types of patients waiting longer, short resources);
and (iv) gauging the benefit of post-pandemic treatment capacity
investments limiting prolonged patient delays.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a review
of the literature, Section 3 establishes the predictive model, and
sections 4 and 5 detail the undertaken case study along with the
findings. Sections 6 and 7 finally list the limitations of the study
and conclude potential future prospects.

3. Literature Review:

In the literature, various studies have addressed patient waiting list problems and optimisation of resources in hospitals. Daldoul et al. [11] propose a stochastic mixed integer programming
model to optimise resources such as physicians and nurses in
order to minimise patient waiting time in the emergency department. The impact of transferring non-urgent patients as a
result of emergency department overcrowding is examined by
Nezamoddini et al. [12]. The transfer minimises patient waiting
times while maintaining the same capacity of resources. The
model suggested in Oh et al. [13] was used to investigate problem
areas concerning process flow, resource allocation, and operational policies in order to optimise an emergency department’s
throughput. Bhattacharjee and Ray [14] propose a model of a
hospital appointment system that recognises different patient
classes for a radiology department’s scanning machine. Multiple
appointment system policies are evaluated with patient waiting
time and resource utilisation being the monitored criteria for
success. Both models [13,14] are implemented using discreteevent simulation. Mahmoudzadeh et al. [15] target rising waiting
times for healthcare services by investigating patient scheduling
policies using a robust optimisation approach.
Data analytics have been widely explored in healthcare to
fulfil a multitude of patient care targets. Among these targets,
waiting time serves as a common measure for a healthcare system’s performance. In fact, most NHS trusts have continuously
exceeded their maximum waiting targets [16]. As a result, waiting
time predictions have been well-explored within pre-pandemic
literature.

3.1 Pre-pandemic predictive models

Several authors adopted a machine learning methodology to
predict patient waiting time among other KPIs. Kaul et al. [17]
conduct a comparative study among different prediction-based
algorithms (CARE, COHESY, and HARM) highlighting their key
features and limitations. While this study [17] explores different
machine learning algorithms, Curtis et al. [18] propose a universal
predictive model for patient waiting time by assessing nine machine learning algorithms according to a set of evaluation criteria
(e.g. root mean square error). The research objectives comprise
encouraging superior staff responsiveness and patient satisfaction. Sun et al. [19] employ Quantile Regression to predict waiting
time in real-time given a certain set of patient characteristics
(e.g. patient acuity) to improve patient satisfaction and quality
of care. The resulting forecasts incurred a prediction error of
only 9 to 16 min. Joseph et al. [20] and Goncalves et al. [21]
both adopt the Random Forest Regression methodology to predict waiting time and pinpoint the variables with the highest
predictive power.
While these studies have generated reasonably sound results
(e.g. accuracy of 50.09% [21]), other authors have approached
the problem using more holistic methodologies to mitigate the
limitations of ‘black box’ machine learning techniques. In fact, Liu
et al. [22] isolate the root cause of macro-level features (e.g. high
waiting time and length of stay) using agent-based simulation
modelling to improve resource allocation and strategic planning.
Babashov et al. [23] adopt a discrete-event simulation model
highlighting system bottlenecks and quantifying the impact of
resource levels to reduce patient waiting time. Chong et al. [24]
model patient flow using a system dynamics model to examine the trade-off between waiting time, occupancy, and safety
outcomes.
The studies listed above offer significant insight on healthcare
predictive models. However, when it comes to the application
pursued in this paper, a strong historical basis – an imperative
and universal factor for the accuracy of these models – for pandemic patient delays sufficient for isolating patterns is lacking.
The rest of this section explores approaches from existing literature on overcoming this shortcoming and adopted predictive
models for unprecedented events.

3.2 Pandemic predictive models

Throughout the pandemic, predictive analytics have been
utilised to forecast infection rates, admissions rates, and waiting
list size among a multitude of KPIs.
When it comes to predicting waiting list size and the corresponding costs, authors have relied on aggregated hospital data
to draw out conclusions. In fact, based on NHS data, Macdonald
et al. [25] estimate the building backlog of elective procedures
to accentuate the current state of waiting lists and propose solutions. The authors highlight the diminishing compliance with
pre-pandemic waiting time standards (87% in 2019 vs. 83.2% in
2020). They anticipate 400,000 cases to be missed every month.
Sud et al. [5] also examine the impact of different scenarios on
the waiting list backlog for cancer referrals based on historical age- and cancer stage-stratified data. For every prospective
level of backlog (ranging from 25% to 75%), the number of lives
potentially lost is quantified. The implications of capacity investments are similarly measured in terms of the number of
lives potentially saved. Fowler et al. [26] model the expected
number of surgeries performed, the resources required, and the
cost of delayed surgery. Garcia-Rojo et al. [27] conduct an observational descriptive study to assess the impact of the pandemic
on urology surgical waiting lists in high-volume hospitals. The
resulting mean waiting time observed substantially exceeded that
of 2019 as well as acceptable delay thresholds in some cases.
However, given the descriptive methodology design adopted in
these studies, the analysis lacked a long-term outlook on patient
waiting time.
Other authors approached the problem using more analytical methodologies. Oussedik et al. [28] model the orthopaedic
pathway as a dynamic system. The research objective comprises
estimating the potential number of patients on elective waiting
lists and proposing recovery strategies. The model suggests that
while financially burdensome, expanding service capacity by 30%
substantially reduces the time required to restore pre-COVID
waiting list levels. Joshi et al. [29] employ machine learning
(based on an optimisation algorithm) fed by internal hospital data
to create an interactive predictive analytics tool. The tool offers
real-time estimations on the expected backlog clearance time,
overtime required, and potential costs associated with backlog
reduction, assuming an optimal assignment of resources. While
both studies focus on resource availability and allocation, the
model proposed in this paper offers estimations on delay time
which would highlight the groups of patients requiring resource
investments.
Wood [30] also approach predictions using a more systematic
methodology, discrete-time simulation. The research objective is
to quantify the implications of the pandemic on the backlog and
estimate the service capacity required to restore pre-pandemic
waiting list levels. The monitored outputs concern the waiting list
size and the proportion of waiting patients in compliance with
the 18-week standard. Given that the study was conducted back
in March 2020, a series of simplifications were considered for the
distribution of patient arrivals and priority classes. Ho et al. [31]
serves as another study that directly pursues pandemic waiting lists. The model anticipates the cumulative deficit between
the actual and expected procedures based on historical data, a
method similarly considered in this paper. The authors postulate
that even with mitigation measures, it could take longer than a
year to eliminate the implications of the pandemic. Given that
the model relies on national aggregated patient data, high-level
conclusions regarding the overall trajectory of the waiting list are
presented. Thus, the limitations restricting these studies [30,31]
lies within the limited granularity in monitoring waiting time,
irrespective of patient characteristics.
To summarise the above, the main limitations of both pre- and
post-pandemic predictive models are the limited granularity in
monitoring waiting time, irrespective of patient types and characteristics, and the lack of a long-term outlook on the trajectory
of the waiting list post-pandemic.
Many papers [13,32], and [23] highlighted the value of simulation modelling and, in particular, discrete-event simulation as a
highly informative tool for healthcare planning to minimise waiting lists and maintain acceptable waiting time thresholds, as well
as to investigate the impact of what-if scenarios on various KPIs.
The authors in Salmon et al. [33] provide a literature review of
applications of simulation modelling to emergency departments.
The rise in recent publications indicate the potential of simulation
in reaching a clinical audience.
The model introduced in this paper addresses the limitations
identified above using simulation modelling given its modelcentricity as opposed to data-centric machine learning algorithms. That is, rare disruptions or soft factors (e.g. waiting list
patient mortality) with little data basis to be picked up by pattern
recognition can also be incorporated for accuracy. The model
employs predictive analytics supported by waiting list policy
planning to offer a short- and long-term outlook on the waiting
list backlog, which directly corresponds to the research aims
targeted by this study.

4. Model
The proposed model adopts discrete-event simulation to represent the waiting list system. This methodology is considered
given its granular representation of the system, breaking it down
to patient-by-patient events marking referral to treatment, entering the waiting list, receiving treatment, and leaving the system.
This granularity also encourages the inclusion of different patient
characteristics that define each event (e.g. a patient requiring a
colonoscopy would spend 2.5 h receiving treatment versus 3 h
in the case of gastroscopy patients). The patient characteristics
would then characterise the predictions of delays in treatment
generated by the model. The objectives of the model are detailed in Section 3.1 followed by a description of the model
logic in Section 3.2. A comprehensive overview of the case study
is then presented including the data used, the experimentation
performed to set up the simulation, and the final implementation
of the model (Section 4). This structure follows the ’Strengthening the Reporting of Empirical Simulation Studies’ (STRESS)
guidelines for discrete-event simulation as presented in [34].

4.1 Objectives

4.1.1 Model purpose
The objectives of this model are threefold: (i) estimating the
average delay time for each patient type in the short-term, (ii)
estimating waiting list levels in the long-term for a given treatment capacity and a set of resources, and (iii) studying the impact
of inflated treatment capacities.

4.1.2 Model outputs
In fact, the model offers a wide range of outputs collected
while the model is running. The following data was particularly
collected to gain a short- and long-term outlook on the expected
delay time for elective patients:
1. Short-term Performance and Delay: Proportion of patients
waiting less than 18-weeks and average delay in treatment
2. Short-term Patient-specific Delay: For every patient type,
confidence intervals for the average delay in treatment
3. Long-term Waiting List Trajectory: Waiting list levels for a
pre-determined timeframe

4.1.3 Experimentation aims
The sensitivity of these outputs in regards to treatment capacity is also studied using the model. Different levels of increased
treatment capacity are considered with the objective of determining the most optimal level to mitigate the implications of the
pandemic. These scenarios are further explained in Section 5.4.

4.2 Logic

4.2.1 Base model overview and logic
To represent the waiting list system and break it down to
different events dictating a patient’s journey, the model consists
of two separate yet interdependent flows: patient and signal
flow. The patient flow represents patients joining the waiting
list with a set of characteristics/attributes and undergoing treatment. This flow allows the model to keep track of granular
patient-by-patient time accounts.
The signal flow serves as a series of periodic triggers for waiting list updates (e.g. updating the priority number of waiting patients every five minutes) and patient releases to treatment when
resources are available. These entities support the collection of
waiting list KPIs.
Fig. 1 summarises the overall logic of the model. The sensitivity analysis in Section 5.4 adopts the same methodology with the
only variable being treatment capacity or the number of patients
that can be treated in a given time period.